Timestamp-Aware Spatio-Temporal Graph Contrastive Learning for
Network Intrusion Detection⋆
Jianli Daia,1, Guangwei Wua,∗, Jiacheng Lia, Weiping Wangb, An Hea and Xinjun Xiaoa
aCentral South University of Forestry and Technology, School of Computer Science and Mathematics, Changsha, 410004, Hunan, P.R. China
bCentral South University, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Changsha, 410083, Hunan, P.R. China
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Temporal graph
Self-supervised learning
Graph neural networks
Network intrusion detection systems
A B S T R A C T
Given their eﬀectiveness in modeling the relational structure among network traﬃc ﬂows, graph
neural networks (GNNs) have been widely adopted in network intrusion detection systems (NIDSs).
However, most existing GNN-based NIDS approaches focus on the relational structure of traﬃc ﬂows,
and treat them as temporally independent, which limits their ability to cope with evolving attack
behaviors. Moreover, their reliance on supervised or semi-supervised learning often restricts gen-
eralization to unseen attacks. To address these limitations, we propose a novel self-supervised GNN-
based framework. To the best of our knowledge, the proposed model is among the ﬁrst self-supervised
GNN-based NIDS models to explicitly leverage real timestamps, which provides faithful temporal
dependencies for representation learning. We ﬁrst construct a series of temporal graphs from network
traﬃc ﬂows according to their timestamps, and then employ an E-GraphSAGE and LSTM based
encoder to fully extract temporal information and spatial dependencies of network traﬃc, without
introducing time-costly attentionmechanisms. A multi-view graph contrastive learning (GCL) scheme
is introduced, where temporal, spatial, and feature contrasts are jointly performed to capture temporal
continuity, preserve structural consistency, and improve the generalization and robustness of the
learned representations, respectively. In addition, a gradient-norm-based adaptive weighting strategy
is designed to optimize the contrastive loss weights. Experimental results on four representative
NIDS datasets with real timestamps demonstrate that our method signiﬁcantly outperforms existing
self-supervised approaches and achieves performance comparable to the supervised state-of-the-art
GNN method, while maintaining high computational eﬃciency. These results further validate the
eﬀectiveness of explicitly modeling temporal dependencies in NIDSs. The code and resources of our
experiments are available at https://github.com/Rory6235/STG-NIDS.
1. Introduction
The exponential development of the Internet and Internet
of Things (IoT) technologies has led to the widespread
deployment of networks, which consist of heterogeneous
devices (e.g., computers, sensors, and smart devices) and in-
terconnected communication components, making them an
essential part of modern society[1]. Massive volumes of net-
work traﬃc ﬂows are continuously generated by host-to-host
communications in heterogeneous networks and evolve over
time, exhibiting complex temporal and spatial dependencies
[2]. Such complex and evolving characteristics expand the
attack surface of networks, resulting in ubiquitous cyberat-
tacks that threaten conﬁdentiality, integrity, and availability
[3]. In particular, sophisticated attacks such as denial-of-
service (DoS), distributed denial-of-service (DDoS), and
scanning attacks frequently exhibit temporal and spatial
correlations among multiple hosts, which pose signiﬁcant
challenges to accurately identifying malicious activities. To
address these challenges, numerous security technologies
have been developed, among which network intrusion de-
tection systems (NIDSs) play a crucial role in monitoring
⋆This work is supported by the National Key Research and Develop-
ment Program of China under Grant 2023YFB3106900, the Key Scientiﬁc
Research Projects of Hunan Provincial Education Department under Grant
25A0266 and 24A0197.
∗Corresponding author
guangweiwu@csuft.edu.cn (G. Wu)
network traﬃc ﬂows and identifying malicious activities in
a timely and automated manner [4].
The prevailing solutions in NIDS are primarily driven
by machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) [5]. Al-
though traditional ML-based NIDS performs eﬀectively on
ﬂat and handcrafted network traﬃc features, it struggles to
capture the structural dependencies and interactions among
network traﬃc ﬂows [6]. In contrast, DL-based models
are capable of learning non-linear, high dimensional, and
sequential patterns from raw network traﬃc ﬂows, thereby
signiﬁcantly enhancing the detection capability of complex
and evolving attacks [7]. Network traﬃc ﬂows in NIDS can
be naturally modeled as a graph, where hosts are represented
as nodes, and the network traﬃc ﬂows exchanged between
hosts are represented as edges. As a subﬁeld of deep learn-
ing, graph neural networks (GNNs) have been demonstrated
great ability in exploiting graph-structured data, enabling ef-
fective modeling of dependencies and interactions between
hosts [4]. Nevertheless, representative GNN-based methods,
including GraphSAGE and graph attention networks (GATs)
[8], primarily adopt the node-centric learning paradigm and
directly rely on node features, thus ignoring edge features
that characterize network traﬃc behavior. This node-centric
design is inherently limited for NIDS, as most discriminative
information,such as durations, timestamps, and protocol, are
carried by network traﬃc ﬂows rather than by hosts. To ad-
dress this limitation, several studies [9] have extended GNN
models to jointly exploit node and edge features, allowing
J. Dai et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 1 of 16

Figure 1: Deployment overview of the proposed framework.
The table on the center-right lists network traﬃc ﬂows
collected by storage database within a speciﬁc time interval,
and the graph on the center-left depicts the spatial topology
constructed from these ﬂows. We mention that the spatial
topology of the network is often inconsistent with its underlying
physical connectivity.
the models to more eﬀectively characterize network traﬃc
behaviors. By integrating node and edge features, these
approaches can capture the intricate dependencies among
hosts and ﬂows, achieving excellent performance in network
intrusion detection tasks.
Most existing GNN-based models for NIDS are trained
in a supervised or semi-supervised manner [9, 10], which
heavily depends on large-scale labeled data. Such meth-
ods require labor-intensive manual annotation of network
traﬃc ﬂows, making the training process costly and time-
consuming. Moreover, the complex and dynamically evolv-
ing nature of network traﬃc ﬂows often leads to pre-
viously unseen attack patterns, which further limits the
generalizability of supervised models [11]. To alleviate
the dependence on expensive labeled data, self-supervised
learning has emerged as a promising paradigm, enabling
GNN models to learn informative representations from
unlabeled graph-structured data [12]. Recent studies have
introduced self-supervised learning and graph contrastive
learning (GCL) into NIDS, learning discriminative repre-
sentations of network traﬃc ﬂows by contrasting diﬀerent
graph views without relying on labeled annotations [13, 14,
15]. Caville et al. [14] proposed Anomal-E, a self-supervised
GNN-based NIDS that explicitly incorporates edge features
and topology. Xu et al. [15] proposed NEGAT+NEGSC that
adopts attention-based multi-perspective contrast to enhance
both binary and multiclass classiﬁcations in NIDS.
Given that real-world network environments evolve con-
tinuously, network intrusion detection inherently involves
both spatial and temporal characteristics. Malicious activ-
ities often present distinct spatial structures such as bot-
net communications, lateral movement patterns, abnormal
connectivity while simultaneously exhibiting temporal pat-
terns including DoS/DDoS bursts, progressive inﬁltration.
However, most existing self-supervised GNN-based NIDS
built on static graphs tend to overlook the inherent temporal
dynamics of network traﬃc ﬂows. Spatio-temporal GNNs
provide an eﬀective way to jointly model spatial depen-
dencies and temporal representations from graph-structured
data [16] and therefore have been increasingly adopted for
NIDS [17, 18, 19]. Langendonck et al. [17] employed self-
supervised pre-training and sliding-window temporal graphs
to enable near real-time intrusion detection. Escriche et al.
[18] proposed CCSTGN, a channel-centric spatio-temporal
GNN that models communication channels as nodes with
continuous temporal representations. Wu et. al [19] further
proposed TCG-IDS to exploit temporal information through
self-supervised contrastive with generated timestamps.
To address the aforementioned limitations, we propose
a novel spatio-temporal self-supervised GNN-based frame-
work for network intrusion detection that ﬁrst explicitly
incorporates real timestamps to model the temporal evo-
lution of network traﬃc ﬂows. The overview architecture
of the proposed framework is illustrated in Fig. 1. Unlike
existing GNN-based NIDS that rely on labeled data or ar-
tiﬁcially generated timestamps, our framework adopts self-
supervised learning to leverage spatio-temporal graphs to
jointly capture spatial structures and temporal dynamics of
network traﬃc ﬂows.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as
follows:
• We propose a novel self-supervised GNN-based frame-
work for NIDS. To the best of our knowledge, the
proposed framework is among the ﬁrst to explicitly
model the intrinsic temporal dependencies among
network traﬃc ﬂows using the dataset-provided real
timestamps. By deeply integrating temporal and spa-
tial information via a spatio-temporal encoder and a
timestamp-aware contrastive objective, the proposed
model fully captures latent spatio-temporal patterns
while maintaining eﬃcient inference without relying
on attention mechanisms.
• We design three self-supervised graph contrastive ob-
jectives to capture latent spatio-temporal representa-
tions and alleviate label dependence under evovling
attack patterns. Temporal contrast aligns a node’s
predicted representation with its corresponding repre-
sentation at the next time interval to maintain temporal
smoothness. Spatial contrast increases the similar-
ity between the representations of each node and its
neighbors within the same temporal graph to preserve
J. Dai et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 2 of 16

local structural coherence. Feature contrast constructs
augmented and perturbed samples of nodes based
on spatio-temporal weights to improve the model’s
generalization and robustness. To coordinate these
objectives, we further propose a gradient-norm-based
adaptive weighting strategy to dynamically balance
multiple contrastive losses.
• We conduct extensive evaluations on four widely used
datasets with real timestamps from both theoretical
and experimental perspectives. Theoretical time com-
plexity analysis shows that replacing edge-dependent
attention mechanisms with explicit temporal depen-
dency modeling yields a more eﬃcient computational
scheme. Experimental results show that our model
consistently outperforms related representative self-
supervised models and state-of-the-art GNN-based
supervised method on both binary and multiclass clas-
siﬁcation tasks, while achieving higher computational
eﬃciency. Moreover, the ablation studies illustrate the
importance of temporal information in models for
NIDSs.
2. Related Works
The section reviews recent studies from three aspects:
network intrusion detection system, graph self-supervised
learning, and spatio-temporal graph neural networks. The
review aims to clarify their strengths and limitations, and to
establish the motivation for our proposed approach.
2.1. Network Intrusion Detection System
Network intrusion detection system (NIDS) is a security
mechanism designed to monitor and analyze network traﬃc
ﬂows in real time for detecting malicious activities.
Recently, machine learning (ML) and deep learning
(DL) techniques have been widely adopted in NIDS due
to their strong capability in pattern recognition and data-
driven modeling. ML-based NIDS typically exploys su-
pervised learning methods to classify network traﬃc ﬂows
and identify malicious activities. Lee et al. [20] applied an
extreme learning machine (ELM) with equation constrained
optimization to NIDS and proposed an adaptive incremental
learning method to determine the optimal number of hidden
neurons. Compared with traditional ML-based approaches,
DL-based NIDS exhibit signiﬁcant advantages in model-
ing complex, high-dimensional network traﬃc ﬂows and
enabling automated feature extraction, which is critical for
behavior and anomaly analysis. Vinayakumar et al. [21]
systematically investigated the application of convolutional
neural networks (CNNs), recurrent neural networks (RNNs),
long- and short-term memory (LSTM) and gate recurrent
units (GRUs) in NIDS. Experiment results demonstrate that
CNN-based models and their variants consistently outper-
form traditional ML-based methods in network attack detec-
tion, among which the CNN-LSTM architecture achieves the
best performance. Furthermore, Haitao et al. [22] proposed
a multimodal sequential NIDS by integrating deep autoen-
coders with LSTM networks to jointly capture structural in-
formation and temporal dependencies shared across similar
network connections. Owing to their strong capability in
capturing structural dependencies and interaction patterns
among network hosts, graph neural networks (GNNs) have
attracted increasing attention in NIDS. Consequently, GNN
methods have been widely explored by researchers for NIDS
applications. Lo et al. [9] proposed E-GraphSAGE, a GNN-
based NIDS model that incorporates edge features and graph
topology to eﬀectively model network traﬃc ﬂows, enabling
eﬃcient detection of complex attacks in IoT networks and
achieving superior detection performance compared to ex-
isting models.
However, most existing models for NIDS are based on
supervised or semi-supervised learning paradigms and rely
heavily on labeled data, which may limit the generalization
in diﬀerent network environments.
2.2. Graph Self-supervised Learning
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has gained signiﬁcant
attention due to its ability to learn robust representations
without requiring labeled data. Existing SSL methods can be
broadly categorized into generative-based and contrastive-
based approaches. Generative SSL aims to reconstruct or
model the underlying data distribution in a task-agnostic
manner, enabling its applicability to various downstream
tasks such as classiﬁcation and generation [23]. In con-
trast, contrastive SSL focuses on learning disciminative rep-
resentations by maximizing the agreement between posi-
tive pairs while distinguishing negative samples, and has
demonstrated superior performance in many representation
learning tasks. As a prominent contrastive SSL paradigm,
graph contrastivelearning (GCL) reduces the dependence on
labeled data by exploring the inherent similarities and diﬀer-
ences among graph components, such as nodes, subgraphs
and entire graphs.
The origins of graph self-supervised learning can be
traced back to early studies on unsupervised graph embed-
ding methods [24, 25], which learn node representations by
maximizing the agreement between contextual nodes within
truncated random walks [11]. Subsequently, graph autoen-
coders (GAEs) [26], were proposed as a widely adopted
unsupervised learning framework that reconstructs graph
structures and can be viewed as an early form of graph
self-supervised learning. Furthermore, deep graph infomax
(DGI) [27] introduced a mutual information maximization
objective between node-level and graph-level representa-
tions as a self-supervised proxy task, marking an important
milestone in the development of graph self-supervised learn-
ing. Y. You et al.[28] introduced an eﬀective self-supervised
learning framework, GCA, which leverages graph augmen-
tations to learn roboust representations. Generative Sub-
graph Contrast (GSC) [29] introduced an adaptive subgraph
generation strategy within a contrastive learning framework
J. Dai et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 3 of 16

to learn eﬃcient and robust representations, where the opti-
mal transmission distance is employed as a similarity mea-
sure between subgraphs.
In NIDS, Cavillea et al. [14] proposed Anomal-E, a self-
supervised intrusion detection framework that exploits both
edge features and graph structural information achieving
great results in binary classiﬁcation tasks. Xu et al. [15]
proposed an improved self-supervised method, NEGSC,
which contrasts subgraphs generated from a center node
and its neighboring nodes, and demonstrates superior per-
formance in both binary and multiclass intrusion detection.
C. Wu et al. [19] designed TCG-IDS, a self-supervised IDS
framework that leverages temporal contrastive graph neural
network (GNN) and multiple contrasting strategies with
time dependency, achieving strong performance on NetFlow
datasets. However, because the dataset used in TCG-IDS
does not provide real timestamps for network ﬂows, its
temporal graphs are constructed from a generated timeline
constructed from ﬂow duration, rather than from dataset-
provided real timestamps. Such a generated timeline may
not faithfully reﬂect the real temporal order and evolution
patterns of network traﬃc.
In conclusion, most existing self-supervised NIDS meth-
ods do not explicitly model temporal information and treat
timestamps as regular features, making it fail to capture
the temporal continuity of host behaviors and the evolution
of attacks over time. The only method [19] that incorpo-
rates temporal dependencies is designed based on gener-
ated timestamps, which is constructed using the duration of
network ﬂows rather than the real timestamps. This clearly
prevents the method from preserving the true ordering of
network traﬃc ﬂows, thereby limiting its adaptability to
dynamic real-world scenarios.
2.3. Spatio-Temporal Graph Neural Networks
Spatio-temporal graph neural networks (STGNNs) con-
stitute a deep learning framework that integrates GNNs
with time-series modeling techniques to capture both spatial
dependencies and temporal dynamics in complex data. The
core idea of STGNNs is to represent spatio-temporal data
as graph-structured information, where nodes correspond to
network hosts and edges as network traﬃc ﬂows between
network hosts, which are constructed according to the tem-
poral evolution of network traﬃc ﬂows. By jointly model-
ing graph topology and temporal evolution, STGNNs learn
expressive spatio-temporal representations through GNNs.
In recent years, STGNNs have been extensively stud-
ied across a wide range of Application domains, including
network intrusion detection, anomaly detection, and traﬃc
forcasting. Rossi et al. [30] introduced TGN, a general and
eﬃcient deep learning framework for dynamic graphs repre-
sented as sequences of time events, which integrates memory
modules and graph-based operators while requiring substan-
tial memory during training. Chen et al. [31] proposed Dy-
SubC, a self-supervised dynamic learning framework which
contrasts temporal subgraphs by introducing a novel tempo-
ral subgraph sampling method, enabling the model to jointly
capture the structural and evolutionary features of dynamic
graphs. H. Wang et al. [32] proposed an intelligent digi-
tal twin framework for IoT attack detection, which selects
informative feature subsets based on information gain and
employs a simpliﬁed CNN model to capture the temporal
patterns of attack behaviors. B. Yu et al. [33] formulated
time series prediction as a graph problem and introduced a
spatio-temporal graph convolutional network (STGCN) with
fully convolutional structures, enabling eﬃcient modeling
and faster training. Duan et al. [34] developed a network
anomaly detection framework based on continuous temporal
graph (CTG) neural network, which reﬁnes the speciﬁc
information interactions, thus naturally incorporating new
node access behaviors into the feature extraction of CTG
neural networks.
These studies collectively highlight the importance of
jointly modeling spatial dependencies and temporal infor-
mation, enabling models to improve detection accuracy and
robustness in diverse network environments. However, most
existing models are either developed for general dynamic
graph learning or tailored for some special time series pre-
diction. As a result, they are hard to applied directly to NIDS
in evolving network environments, where the constructed
graph in network has unique characteristics. Speciﬁcally,
most of the information is often carried by edges, and the
graphs tend to be dense and multigraph.
3. Methodology
In this section, we ﬁrst describe the data pre-processing
and the feature selection engineering, and present the nota-
tions of our approach in detail. Then, a spatio-temporal self-
supervised GNN-based framework for network intrusion
detection that ﬁrst leverages real timestamps is introduced.
which is shown in Fig. 2. The overall framework consists
of three main components: temporal graph construction,
spatio-temporal GNN encoder, and graph contrastive learn-
ing. Speciﬁcally,
1) Temporal graph construction aims to divide the net-
work ﬂows into multiple temporal graphs in the order of real
timestamps.
2) Spatio-temporal GNN encoder captures spatial de-
pendencies and temporal information and learn diverse
high-dimension graph representation, which consists of E-
GraphSAGE used for aggregating edge features, fusion layer
to combine the temporal and spatial information, and LSTM
to capture the hidden states and cell memories.
3) Graph contrastive learning adopts three strategies to
guide the model in learning latent embeddings by taking
advantage of temporal, spatial and feature similarities within
each temporal graph.
Finally, a detailed time complexity analysis is presented
for our model and the compared models.
3.1. Data Pre-processing
The preprocessing data is crucial to ensure data con-
sistency and improve model performance. The steps in our
J. Dai et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 4 of 16

Network Attackers
Malicious 
Traffics
Traffic Type
·Normal traffics
·DoS
·DDoS
·Reconnaissance
·Password
·Backdoor
·Rensomware
·...
Network Traffic Record
Time
Traffic
Data Collection
Network Data CSV
Temporal Graph Construction
Data Preprocessing
Data Cleaning
Categorical 
Feature 
Encoding
Data 
Normalization
Graph Contrastive Learning
Contrastive Methods
Spatio-Temporal GNN Encoder
Contrastive Loss Computation
Temporal
Spatial 
Feature
Trained Weight Matrix W
Normal
Normal
Attack
Attack
Attack
Classification Task
Trained Model
...
...
SrcIP
Port
DstIP
Port
Time
...
Type
192.168.100.7
49960
192.168.100.7
80
1528089e+09
...
Normal
192.168.100.8
8
192.168.100.5
80
1.528765e+09
...
Attack
...
192.168.100.1
5
43001
152.168.100.15
4433
1.529381e+09
...
Attack
Temporal
Spatial
Feature
Total Loss
......
t=1
predict
Positive
Negative
Anchor
Positive
Negative
t~C
t'~C
Adaptive Parameter Optimization
Hyperparameters: a b g
t=2
t=4
...
t=T
t=1
...
Temporal Graphs
Aggregate
t=1
v0
v1
v5
v3
v4
v2
Update
h 2
h 3
h 4
h 1
h 5
x0
x
h
t=1
v0
v1
v5
v3
v4
v2
Output
h2
h3
h4
h1
h5
h 0
Feature
t=1
v0
v1
v5
v3
v4
v2
e 02
e 34
e 14
e05
e 03
e 01
Embedding
t=2
t=T
t=2
t=4
...
t=T
t=1
...
Cell memory 
LSTM
x2
x3
x4
x5
x1
x0
Output
zt
z Representation
Figure 2: The overview of the NIDS framework. The upper layer presents the information of network traﬃc ﬂows. The middle
layer illustrates temporal graph construction, and shows how spatio-temporal GNN encodes node and edge features by modeling
temporal dependencies. The lower layer introduces how graph contrastive learning guides the model to learn representations and
detect malicious network traﬃc ﬂows.
study are as follows: data cleaning, categorical feature cod-
ing and data normalization. Initially, raw network traﬃc
data, including features like source/destination IP addresses,
ports, packet size and ﬂow information, are structured into
a tabular format, where missing or erroneous values, such
as NaN or undeﬁned symbols (e.g., ’-’) are removed. Sub-
sequently, categorical features are encoded to numerical
values using LabelEncoder, which assigns a unique integer
to each category. For a categorical feature with unique val-
ues, LabelEncoder would map each category to an integer.
Ultimately, the numerical values of features are standardized
by StandardScaler, which transforms the data to have a
mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. This process can
ensure that each feature contributes equally to the model
learning process. It is worth noting that in our method,
time-relevant features, such as timestamps, are selected as
separate columns for subsequent use.
3.2. Feature Selection Engineering
To evaluate the discriminative ability of each feature
with respect to the target variable, we train a random forest
(RF) model and extract the feature-importance scores from
the model. The scores measure the contribution of each
feature in the process of constructing the decision tree. We
then sort these features into non-increasing order by their
importance scores and retain only the top-ranked features
for our model training. This helps accelerate the training
process. The top-15 feature importance scores of ToN-IoT
dataset are presented in Fig.3.
3.3. Graph Construction
Given a dataset, we ﬁrst sort all network traﬃc ﬂows in
non-decreasing order of their timestamps, and then divide
them into 푇daily intervals. For each interval 푡∈{1, … , 푇},
we construct a temporal graph 푡= (푡, 푡) using the ﬂows
occurring within the interval 푡. Here, 푡is the node set,
where each node 푣푖∈푡corresponds to a unique network
host identiﬁed by its IP address. Note that two diﬀerent
graphs, 푡and 푡′, may share some nodes. 푡is the edge set,
where each edge 푒푡
푖푗푘∈푡represents the 푘-th network traﬃc
ﬂow between the nodes 푣푖and 푣푗during the time interval 푡.
For 1 ≤푡≤푇, we deﬁne the feature of each node 푣푖∈푡
as the vector 퐱푡
푖, and the feature of each edge 푒푡
푖푗푘∈푡as
the vector 퐞푡
푖푗푘. Furthermore, given two temporal graphs 푡
and 푡+푡1, we call them adjacent if 푡1 = 1, i.e., 푡+푡1 is in the
next time interval. In contrast, we call them distant if 푡1 is
suﬃciently large. In our experiments, 푡1 is set to 4 for distant
graphs.
3.4. Spatio-Temporal GNN Encoder
After graph construction for the dataset, we obtain a se-
quence of temporal graphs {푡}푇
푡=1. We now propose a novel
spatio-temporal GNN encoder to learn the representation 퐳푡
푖
of each node 푣푖∈푡of every graph 푡, for 1 ≤푡≤푇.
The main idea of the proposed encoder is that: the
representation of each node of temporal graph 푡is ob-
tained using the standard LSTM framework on the node
and edge features of 푡and the representations of nodes
J. Dai et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 5 of 16

Figure 3: The Top-15 feature importance of ToN-IoT Dataset.
in the previous temporal graph 푡−1. The design enables
the model to capture the temporal dependencies of network
ﬂows across consecutive timestamp-ordered graphs. For the
temporal graph 1, the hidden state 퐡0
푖and cell memory 퐜0
푖
for each node 푣푖are initialized to zero due to the absence
of historical information. For a subsequent temporal graph
푡, 2 ≤푡≤푇, we assume that the node representations
for all previous graphs 푡′ with 푡′ < 푡have already been
obtained. The node representations for 푡are computed in
the following steps. For every node 푣푖∈, the encoder ﬁrst
concatenates the initial node features 퐱푡
푖with the previous
embedding 퐡푡−1
푖
, and then maps the concatenated vector to
the same dimension space as the node embedding 퐡푡
푖through
a learnable weight matrix 푊followed by a nonlinear acti-
vation function 휎. That is:
퐡푡
푖= 휎(푊⋅[퐱푡
푖, 퐡푡−1
푖
])
(1)
, where 퐡푡
푖will be used as the input of E-GraphSAGE. This
design enables the model to simultaneously consider the
inherent features and historical state information of nodes,
providing a richer input representation for subsequent graph
encoding operations.
Subsequently, in E-GraphSAGE with 푙-layer aggrega-
tion, the initial node embedding 퐡푡,0
푖
of each node 푣푖∈
is set to 퐡푡
푖. For 푙> 0, the node embedding 퐡푡,푙
푖of each node
푣푖in time interval 푡can be obtained as Equation (2):
퐡푡,푙
푖= 휎(푊푙⋅CONCAT(퐡푡,푙−1
푖
, 퐡푡,푙
푁(푖))).
(2)
Here, 푊푙is the weight matrix, 휎is the activation function,
and 퐡푡,푙
푁(푖) is the aggregated representation of neighbors of 푣푖.
It is computed as shown in Equation (3):
퐡푡,푙
푁(푖) = AGG푙(퐡푡,푙−1
푗
, 퐞푡,푙−1
푖푗푘)
(3)
, where AGG푙is the aggregation operation of each layer 푙,
, which is set to mean aggregation in our implementation.
Here, 퐡푡,푙−1
푗
is the node embeddings 퐡푡
푗in layer 푙−1 and
퐞푡,푙−1
푖푗푘
is the edge features 퐞푡
푖푗푘of the 푘-th edge between nodes
Predict
t'=1
pos-sim
loss
Intersections 
t=2
t=4
...
t=T
t=1
...
Temporal Graphs
(t'=1, t=2)
neg-sim
Contrast
(t'=1, t=4)
Figure 4: The temporal contrastive learning process between
nodes across diﬀerent temporal graphs.
푣푖and 푣푗in layer 푙−1 within time interval 푡. The ﬁnal
node embedding 퐡푡
푖for each node 푣푖, i.e., the output of E-
GraphSAGE module, can be obtained through a softmax
layer.
Finally, LSTM regulates information ﬂow via gating
mechanism, which helps alleviate the vanishing gradient
problem in recurrent sequence modeling and enable the
learning of long-range temporal dependencies. With the
input of E-GraphSAGE module, the node embeddings 퐡푡
푖
and cell memory 퐜푡
푖of LSTM module can be expressed as
Equation (4).
(퐡푡
푖, 퐜푡
푖) = LSTM(퐡푡
푖, (퐡푡−1
푖
, 퐜푡−1
푖
))
(4)
, where 퐜푡−1
푖
is the cell memory of each node 푣푖in time
interval 푡−1. After encoding, we can obtain the ﬁnal node
representation 퐳푡
푖= 퐡푡
푖of each node 푣푖in time interval 푡
through a softmax layer.
3.5. Graph Contrastive Learning
The selection of positive and negative samples in graph
contrastive learning is paramount for the classiﬁcation task.
Motivated by the importance of temporal information, spa-
tial dependencies and features of nodes, three kinds of con-
trastive strategies are designed in our method. Through
self-supervised contrastive learning strategies, the learning
of node representations is constrained from these multiple
views, thereby capturing temporal smoothness, spatial con-
sistency, and feature robustness.
3.5.1. Temporal Contrastive Learning
In networks, host communications often persist across
consecutive time intervals, while network workloads and
attack behaviors may evolve over longer time intervals [35,
36]. Thus, node states in our constructed temporal graphs
tend to evolve smoothly between adjacent graphs but diﬀer
substantially across distant graphs. Motivated by this, the
temporal contrastive learning loss aims to model the evolu-
tion of node representations in the temporal dimension. The
whole process is presented in Fig. 4. By distinguishing the
similarity of the same node within adjacent time intervals
fromthat in distant time intervals, the model is encouragedto
learn temporal smoothness. Positive samples are deﬁned as
(푣푡
푖, 푣푡+1
푖
) from two adjacent graphs, while negative samples
are (푣푡
푖, 푣푡+4
푖
) fromtwo distant graphs. To explicitly model the
J. Dai et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 6 of 16

node evolution, we introduce a temporal predictor to learn
the state transition from time interval 푡to 푡+ 1, and use
the predicted representation to match the representation at
interval 푡+ 1. Speciﬁcally, given 퐳푡
푖for node 푣푖in 푡, the
predictor outputŝ 퐳푡
푖via:̂
퐳푡
푖= 휎(푊푝⋅퐳푡
푖)
(5)
, where 휎is ReLU and 푊푝is a learnable weight matrix.
Meanwhile, network topologies evolve over time as
nodes may appear or disappear, so the node sets of temporal
graphs from diﬀerent time intervals are not fully aligned. In
temporal graph contrastive learning, directly contrasting all
node representations may introduce noise and unnecessary
overhead, since nodes without semantic correspondence
cannot form eﬀective positive or negative constraints. There-
fore, we select the intersections = 푡∩푡+1, and =
푡∩푡+4, and use the representations of these corresponding
nodes to calculate the contrastive loss, which maintains
semantic consistency and improves eﬃciency.
To model temporal consistency and discriminability of
node representations, we design a joint objective consisting
of a temporal alignment loss and a temporal interval con-
straint. Speciﬁcally, we encourage smooth and continuous
evolution by minimizing an alignment loss between the
predicted representation̂ 퐳푡
푖and the representation 퐳푡+1
푖
of the
corresponding node at the next time interval 푡+ 1, which is
deﬁned as Equation (6):
align =
1
||

푖∈
(2 −2̂퐳푡
푖⋅퐳푡+1
푖
).
(6)
To avoid representation collapse across diﬀerent tem-
poral graphs, we further introduce an interval separation
constraint on the same nodes that are temporally distant. By
enforcing an upper bound on their similarity, we maintain
suﬃcient discriminability by Equation (7):
uniform =
1
||

푖∈
max(0,̂ 퐳푡
푖⋅퐳푡+4
푖
−푦)
(7)
, where 푦is a similarity upper bound.
The ﬁnal temporal loss tem is:
tem = align + 휓⋅uniform
(8)
, where 휓is a penalty weight that balances the alignment
and separation terms.
3.5.2. Spatial Contrastive Learning
In networks, hosts that directly and frequently commu-
nicate often exist in the same subnet or service chain, and
thus exhibit similar interaction patterns [9, 37]. Accordingly,
the spatial contrastive learning loss leverages graph topology
by constructing contrastive pairs within the local neighbor-
hood: connected node pairs are treated as positive samples,
while randomly sampled unconnected node pairs serve as
negative samples. By pulling neighbors closer and pushing
non-neighbors apart, the model learns node representations
that capture spatial dependencies and local structural consis-
tency.
Speciﬁcally, we take (퐳푡
푖, 퐳푡
푗) as a positive sample pair if
there exists anedge 푒푡
푖푗푘∈푡between 푣푖and 푣푗. For negative
sampling, we use the adjacency matrix to ensure that each
negative node is not directly connected to the anchor nodes
푣푖, avoiding sampling observed neighbors as negatives. For
each positive sample pair, we sample 푆negative nodes to
increase the diﬃculty and improve the informativeness of
spatial contrastive learning. The spatial contrastive loss is
deﬁned as:
spa = −1
|푡|

(푣푖,푣푗)∈푡
log
exp((퐳푡
푖)⊤퐳푡
푗∕휏)
퐷푖푗
(9)
, where
퐷푖푗= exp((퐳푡
푖)⊤퐳푡
푗∕휏) +
푆

푠=1
exp((퐳푡
푖)⊤퐳푡
푖,푠∕휏).
Here, 휏is the temperature coeﬃcient and 퐳푡
푖,푠denotes the
representation of the 푠-th negative node sampled for 푣푖.
3.5.3. Feature Contrastive Learning
In practice, network ﬂows may be collected incom-
pletely, which can introduce noise and missing values into
edge features, thereby aﬀecting the stability of the learned
representations [38]. A common strategy in contrastive
learning is to create semantically consistent yet perturbed
views via feature augmentation, so that the encoder learns
representations that generalize better. Following this idea,
we design an adaptive feature corruption strategy inspired
by GCA, which injects stronger perturbations into less
informative node representations while preserving semantic
information. Speciﬁcally, given node representations 퐳푡
푖, we
obtain a node-wise corruption score from global structural
statistics. Let̂ 푤푖denote log-degree-based score averaged
over time, where low-degree nodes yield larger̂ 푤푖and thus
receive stronger corruption. In negative perturbation, we
normalizê 푤푖by min-max scaling:̂
푤푖=
푤푖−푤푚푖푛
푤푚푎푥−푤푚푖푛
.
(10)
The corruption strength is then determined as:
훿푖= clip(훿0̂푤푖, 훿푚푖푛, 훿푚푎푥)
(11)
, where clip(훿0̂푤푖, 훿푚푖푛, 훿푚푎푥) = min(max(훿0̂푤푖, 훿푚푖푛), 훿푚푎푥)
with 훿0 = 0.2, 훿푚푖푛= 0.01 and 훿푚푎푥= 0.3. We generate the
augmented view by interpolating the node representations
with Gaussian noise:̂
퐳+
푖= (1 −훿푖)퐳푡
푖+ 훿푖휖+
푖, 휖+
푖(0, 휂2
+퐈)
(12)
, where 휂+ = 0.1. This design applies stronger perturbations
to nodes with larger corruption scores.
In negative perturbation, we impose stronger noise per-
turbations on high-degree nodes:̂
퐳−
푖= (1 −휉푖)퐳푡
푖+ 휉푖휖−
푖, 휖−
푖(0, 휂2
−퐈)
(13)
J. Dai et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 7 of 16

t=1
t=2
t=T
Positive
Negative
t~C
......
t'~C
......
......
t=1
Contrast
Contrast 
Positive
Negative
Anchor
loss
pos-sim
neg-sim
Figure 5: The feature contrastive learning process between
nodes in the positive and negative graphs.
, where 휂−= 0.3 and 휉푖= clip(휉0 ⋅
푤푚푎푥−푤푖
푤푚푎푥−푤푚푖푛, 휉푚푖푛, 휉푚푎푥),
with 휉0 = 0.5 and 휉푚푖푛= 0.05, and 휉푚푎푥= 0.5.
The augmented positive and negative samples are uti-
lized to compute the feature contrastive loss through normal-
ized cosine similarity and cross-entropy:
fea = −1
푁
푁

푖=1
log퐴푖
(14)
, where
퐴푖=
exp((퐳푡
푖,̂ 퐳+
푖)∕휏)
exp((퐳푡
푖,̂ 퐳+
푖)∕휏) + exp(sim(퐳푡
푖,̂ 퐳−
푖)∕휏).
Here, 휏is the temperature coeﬃcient. The process of feature
contrastive loss can be seen in Fig. 5. This enables the
learned representation to be robust to feature missing and
noise, which can enhance the distinguisability of diﬀerent
node representations.
3.5.4. Adaptive Parameter Optimization
In multi-view self-supervised learning framework, dif-
ferent loss usually impose distinct semantic constraints and
exhibit signiﬁcantly diﬀerent optimization scales. Using
ﬁxed weights to combine multiple self-supervised objectives
often leads to gradient domination, where one loss over-
whelms the parameter updates and suppresses other learning
signals. Thus, we adopt a gradient-norm based adaptive
loss weighting strategy. Speciﬁcally, Θ푠denotes the shared
parameter set used for learning uniﬁed representations,
and tem, spa and fea denote the three diﬀerent losses,
respectively. At each training iteration, the gradient of each
loss with respect to Θ푠is computed and its 퓁2 norm is used
to measure the optimization strength of the corresponding
self-supervised signal. For a loss , the gradient norm is
deﬁned as:
푔= ‖‖‖∇Θ푠‖‖‖2 =



√
휃∈Θ푠
‖‖‖‖
휕
휕휃
‖‖‖‖
2
2
.
(15)
Consequently, 푔tem, 푔spa, and 푔fea denote the gradient norms
of tem, spa, and fea, respectively. Accordingly, the bal-
ancing coeﬃcients 훼, 훽, 훾are computed dynamically based
Algorithm 1
Input: A graph set = {1, 2, … ,푇} and epochs 퐸.
For 1 ≤푡≤푇, 푡= (푡, 푡) is a temporal graph.
Output: Trained parameters 훩.
1: for 푡= 1 to 푇do
2:
Obtain 푧푡for each graph 푡by Eqs. (2) and (4).
3: end for
4: for 푡= 1 to 푇do
5:
Compute predicted node representations by Eq.(5).
6:
Select intersection of 푡and 푡+1.
7:
Select intersection of 푡and 푡+4.
8:
Compute similarities of (푣푡
푖, 푣푡+1
푖
) in by Eq.(6).
9:
Compute similarities of (푣푡
푖, 푣푡+4
푖
) in by Eq.(7).
10:
Compute temporal contrastive loss tem by Eq. (8).
11:
for all nodes 푣푖∈푡do
12:
Select neighbors as positive 푧푡
푗and non-neighbors as negative
푧푡
푖,푠.
13:
Compute spatial contrastive loss spa by Eq. (9).
14:
end for
15:
for all nodes 푣푖∈푡do
16:
Obtain positivê 푧+
푖and negativê 푧−
푖.
17:
Compute feature contrastive loss fea by Eq. (14).
18:
end for
19:
Adaptive parameter optimization to obtain 훼, 훽, 훾by Eq. (15).
20:
= 훼tem + 훽spa + 훾fea.
21:
Update model parameters 훩.
22: end for
on 푔tem, 푔spa, and 푔fea:
(훼, 훽, 훾) =
푔푡푒푚, 푔푠푝푎, 푔푓푒푎
푔푡푒푚+ 푔푠푝푎+ 푔푓푒푎
(16)
The overall training objective is formulated as:
total = 훼tem + 훽spa + 훾fea.
(17)
This gradient-norm based weighting mechanism plays a
crucial role in self-supervised learning. It explicitly reﬂects
the optimization scale of each contrastive objective on the
shared representation space, preventing any single loss from
dominating the training process.
The whole training process is shown in Algorithm 1.
3.6. Classiﬁcation Task
The proposed method aims to diﬀerentiate between nor-
mal and malicious behaviors and identify the speciﬁc attack
classes in a self-supervised way, which can be seen as
classiﬁcation tasks. All datasets divided into training and
testing data are the inputs of the encoders to obtain ﬁnal
embeddings, respectively, for further classiﬁcation tasks.
Widely used for the binary and multiclass classiﬁcations
in NIDS, two functions, e.g., binary cross-entropy (BCE)
function and the cross-entropy (CE) function, are utilized
in our method to implement the classiﬁcation experiments,
respectively. The detailed parameters are demonstrated in
Table 1.
3.7. The Time Complexity Analysis
The running time of our model is determined by its two
modules: the spatio-temporal encoder and graph contrastive
learning.
J. Dai et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 8 of 16

Table 1
Hyperparameter
Hyperparameter
Values
Number of temporal graph 푇
10
Learning rate (lr)
1e-3
Weight decay
3e-5
Activation function 휎
ReLU
Optimizer
Adam
Similarity upper bound 푦
0.1
Penalty weight 휓
0.05
Number of negative edge 푆
5
Temperature coeﬃcient 휏
0.5
First,we consider the time complexity of spatio-temporal
encoder. In the aggregation process of E-GraphSAGE, each
node needs to consider its adjacent edges along with their
nodes, and thus each edge is counted twice. Since 푇temporal
graphs are constructed and the edge sets of diﬀerent temporal
graphs are disjoint, the total number of edges across all
temporal graphs is 푚, e.g., ∑푇
푡=1 |푡| = 푚. Hence, the
aggregation process takes 푂(2푚) time. In the embedding
process of LSTM, each node passes through four gates, and
each gate involves a matrix multiplication whose running
time depends on the input dimension 푑of node feature. That
is, the embedding process costs 푂(4푑푛) time, where 푛is
the number of node in the graph. Consequently, the time
complexity of the spatio-temporal encoder is 푂(2푚) + 푇⋅
푂(4푑푛) = 푂(2푚+ 4푇푑푛), where 푇is the number of the
constructed temporal graphs.
Then, in graph contrastive learning, we design three
contrastive schemes. In the temporal contrastive learning,
we ﬁrst compute the predicted node representations via a
linear layer in 푂(푑푛). We then ﬁnd the node intersections
among the predicted graph, the adjacent temporal graph, and
the distant temporal graph in 푂(3푛). For each node in the
intersections, we ﬁnally compute two similarities between
positive samples and negative samples using the dot produc-
tion in 푂(2푑푛). Hence, the total time complexity of temporal
contrastive learning is 푂(푑푛+ 3푛+ 2푑푛) = 푂(3푛+ 3푑푛). In
the spatial contrastive learning, for each node in the current
temporal graph, we compute the mean dot-product similarity
to its neighbor nodes (positive sample) and to its 푆(푆is a
constant) randomly selected non-neighbor nodes (negative
sample), respectively. The similarity computation consumes
time 푂(푑푛+푆푑). In feature contrastive learning, we generate
an augmented (positive) and an perturbed (negative) repre-
sentation for each node via two clip-based transformations,
whose temporal weights are precomputed during temporal
graph construction. Therefore, the clip transformation costs
푂(2푛). We then compute the dot-product similarity between
two representations for each node in 푂(푑푛). Overall, the time
complexity of feature contrastive learning is 푂(2푛+ 푑푛).
Since every temporal graph requires computing all these
three contrastive losses, the overall cost of graph contrastive
learning is 푇⋅(푂(3푑푛+ 3푛) + 푂(푑푛+ 푆푑) + 푂(2푛+ 푑푛)) =
Table 2
Comparison of our method and other GNN-based methods on
time complexity.
Method
Time complexity
Ours
푂(2푚+ 9푇푑푛+ 5푇푛+ 푇푆푑)
NEGAT + NEGSC
푂(18푚+ 2푛)
TCG-IDS
푂(16푚+ 푇푛+ 5푇푛푑+ 푇푑̄푑푛)
푂(5푇푑푛+ 5푇푛+ 푇푆푑). Therefore, the time complexity of
the proposed model is 푂(2푚+ 9푇푑푛+ 5푇푛+ 푇푆푑).
NEGAT + NEGSC has a time complexity of 푂(4퐾퐼푚+
2퐼푚+ 2푛), where 푂(4퐾퐼푚+ 2퐼푚) is by the computation
of attention coeﬃcients and aggregation of NEGAT, and 퐼
is the numbers of attention heads and 퐾is the number of
layers, and 푂(2푛) is bythe edge construction step of NEGSC.
With heads 퐼= 3 and layer 퐾= 1, the time complexity is
푂(18푚+2푛). TCG-IDS has a time complexity of 푂(2퐾퐼푚+
푇푛+ 푇푑푛+ 푇푑̄푑푛+ 4푇푑푛), where 푂(4퐾퐼푚+ 푇푛) is by
the temporal encoder which utilizes attention mechanism,
and 푂(푇푑푛), 푂(푇푑̄푑), 푂(4푇푑푛) are by three contrasting
strategies, and̄ 푑is the dimension of predicted embeddings.
With heads 퐼= 8 and layer 퐾= 1,, the time complexity of
TCG-IDS is 푂(16푚+ 푇푛+ 5푇푑푛+ 푇푑̄푑푛).
In the constructed temporal graphs of NIDS, nodes rep-
resent hosts, and edges represent communications between
them. In networks, the number of edges is typically much
larger than that of the nodes, as hosts may communicate
with each other frequently. Thus, the temporal graphs are
often dense, leading to 푚≫푛, i.e., 푚may grow on 푂(푛2)
or even faster. Consequently, the overall time complexity
is dominated by terms involving 푚, while the node-wise
terms (e.g., 푂(푛) or 푂(푑푛)) are comparatively minor. In this
setting, our method runs in 푂(2푚), which achieves the lowest
time complexity among the related representative methods.
This advantage arises from explicitly modeling temporal
dependencies, which avoids the edge-dependent computa-
tional overhead introduced by attention mechanisms in other
methods. The details are listed in Table 2.
4. Experiments
In this section, we ﬁrst present the experimental setup,
datasets and metrics. The performance of the proposed
model is then reported for binary and multiclass classiﬁ-
cations. Moreover, comparisons with existing methods are
conducted to evaluate the eﬀectiveness of our approach.
Finally, ablation studies are provided to demonstrate the
importance of temporal information.
4.1. Setup
Our model is implemented on a single NVIDIA GeForce
RTX 4090 with 24GB of GPU memory using Python,
PyTorch [39] and PyTorch Geometric [40]. We split the
datasets using a 7:3 ratio for training and testing. After
preprocessing the raw data, 70% of the data for training is
processed and fed into the model, which enables the model
J. Dai et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 9 of 16

Table 3
Datasets Statistics.
Dataset
Normal
Flows
Attack
Flows
Classes
Flow
Features
Time
Attribute
BoT-IoT
477
3,668,045
5
46
stime
ToN-IoT
788,599
21,190,031
10
45
ts
UNSW-NB15
2,218,764
321,283
10
49
stime
NF-UNSW-NB15-v3
2,237,731
127,693
10
49
FLOW START
MILLISECONDS
to learn eﬀective information through iteratively optimizing
and tuning. The remaining 30% of the data for testing is
utilized for evaluating the performance and eﬃciency of the
model.
4.2. Datasets
In our study, three public and widely used datasets
are chosen to implement the experiments, which are BoT-
IoT [41], ToN-IoT [42], and UNSW-NB15 [43]. Recently,
netﬂow datasets that incorporate the temporal features are
emerged to address the gap in standardised feature sets,
e.g., NF-BoT-IoT-v3, NF-ToN-IoT-v3, NF-UNSW-NB15-
v3 [44], etc. For evaluating the eﬃciency of our method in
the netFlow datasets, we select NF-UNSW-NB15-v3 as a
distinctive example. The time-relevant features (e.g., times-
tamp, durations) in the raw data are crucial for capturing
the dynamic nature of network traﬃc in the real-world sce-
narios. BoT-IoT, ToN-IoT, UNSW-NB15 and NF-UNSW-
NB15-v3 are all the datasets used for intrusion detection.
The details of four datasets are demonstrated on the Table
3, which includes the labels, explicit attack types and its
corresponding amounts of each type contained in the raw
data. The four datasets are all ﬁt for binary classiﬁcation,
which is to distinguish whether the traﬃc is anomalous, and
multiclass classiﬁcation, which is to identify the certain type
of the attacks.
The BoT-IoT dataset is created by designing a realistic
network environment in the Cyber Range Lab of UNSW
Canberra, which incorporated a combination of normal and
botnet traﬃc. It consists of 46 basic features especially
start time and late time of each traﬃc, and the amount of
network traﬃcs are 3,668,522, out of which 447 are normal,
and 3,668,045 are attacks which predominantly includes 4
speciﬁc attack types, e.g., DDoS, DoS, and Reconnaissance,
and another attack theft which is a small percentage at
all samples. Attack category and subcategory attributes are
introduced in the dataset, which could be used to train and
test the model in both binary and multiclass classiﬁcations.
The ToN-IoT dataset is collected from a realistic and
large-scale network designed at the Cyber Range and IoT
Labs, which can be utilized for evaluating the ﬁdelity and
eﬃciency of diﬀerent cybersecurity applications such as
intrusion detection systems based on artiﬁcial intelligence.
It contains 45 basic features including timestamp (ts), and
the amount of network traﬃc are 21,978,630, out of which
788,599 are normal, and 21,190,031 are attacks, the speciﬁc
types of which are Scanning, DDoS, DoS, Xss, Password,
Backdoor, Injection, Ransomware and Mitm.
The UNSW-NB15 is a dataset developed at UNSW Can-
berra, which is designed based on a synthetic environment
for generating attack activities. It is made up of 49 basic
features especially timestamp of each traﬃc, and the amount
of network traﬃcs are 2,540,047, out of which 2,218,764 are
normal, and 321,283 are attacks which includes 9 uneven
speciﬁc attack types, e.g., Generic, Exploits, Fuzzers, DoS,
Reconnaissance, Analysis, Backdoor, Shellcode and Worms.
The purpose of the produced dataset is to be utilized for the
generation and validation of intrusion detection.
The NF-UNSW-NB15-v3 dataset is the third iteration of
NetFlow-based datasets converted from the UNSW-NB15
[43], which added time-related features like FLOW START
MILLISECONDS, FLOW START MILLISECONDS, and
SRC TO DST IAT MIN, etc. The inclusion of timestamp
information allows for identifying the exact time of the
traﬃc whne the original traﬃc was captured [44], which
poses a new challenge to devle into temporal analysis of
datasets in NIDS. Speciﬁcally, it contains 2,365,424 ﬂows
in total, out of which 2,365,424 are benign, and 127,693 are
malicious ﬂows, which has the same speciﬁc attack types as
the UNSW-NB15. Deeper insights of dynamic patterns and
temporal features of network behavior can be explored in the
netﬂow dataset due to the added temporal features.
4.3. Evaluation Metrics
To evaluate the performance of our model in binary and
multiclass classiﬁcations, ﬁve metrics widely used in other
recent studies are selected, which are 퐴푐푐푢푟푎푐푦, 푃푟푒푐푖푠푖표푛,
퐹1−푆푐표푟푒, and 푅푒푐푎푙푙. The calculation of all the evaluation
metrics is based on four factors, namely, True Positive (푇푃),
a case where the model correctly predicts the positive class,
False Positive (퐹푃), a case where the model incorrectly
predicts the positive class, True Negative (푇푁), a case
where the model correctly predicts the negative class, and
False Negative (퐹푁), a case where the model incorrectly
predicts the negative class.
퐴푐푐푢푟푎푐푦is the rate at which the model correctly pre-
dicts in all samples.
퐴푐푐푢푟푎푐푦=
푇푃+ 푇푁
푇푃+ 퐹푃+ 푇푁+ 퐹푁
(18)
푃푟푒푐푖푠푖표푛measures the proportion of the samples pre-
dicted by the model to be attacks are actual attacks.
푃푟푒푐푖푠푖표푛=
푇푃
푇푃+ 퐹푃
(19)
푅푒푐푎푙푙represents the ratio of positive samples correctly
predicted by the model to all samples that are actual positive
samples.
푅푒푐푎푙푙=
푇푃
푇푃+ 퐹푁
(20)
퐹1 −푆푐표푟푒is the harmonic mean of Precision and
Recall, which is used to balance the two metrics.
퐹1 −푆푐표푟푒= 2 × 푃푟푒푐푖푠푖표푛× 푅푒푐푎푙푙
푃푟푒푐푖푠푖표푛+ 푅푒푐푎푙푙
(21)
J. Dai et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 10 of 16

Figure 6: The results of binary classiﬁcations on four datasets.
4.4. Experiment Results
The experiment results on four datasets (e.g., BoT-
IoT, ToN-IoN, UNSW-NB15, and NF-UNSW-NB15-v3)
for both binary and multiclass classiﬁcations are illustrated
in four separately subsection. To evaluate the eﬃciency
and performance of our proposed method, we compare
the method with existing graph-based methods, which are
widely applied in NIDS. Furthermore, the ablation experi-
ments are implemented to study the importance of spatial
dependencies, temporal information and semantic features,
following the corresponding results.
4.4.1. Binary Classiﬁcation
The BoT-IoT, ToN-IoT, UNSW-NB15 and NF-UNSW-
NB15-v3 datasets contain numerous ﬂow data, which is
more challenging for the proposed method to evaluate the
detection ability between normal and malicious ﬂows. As the
same operation in [9], we use full datasets BoT-IoT, UNSW-
NB15 and NF-UNSW-NB15-v3, and randomly sample 10%
IoN-IoT dataset due to its large size.The overall performance
of binary classiﬁcations on four datasets are illustrated in
Figure. 6.
Speciﬁcally, on the BoT-IoT dataset, our method achieves
99.99% accuracy, 0.99 precision, 99.99% recall, and 0.99
F1-score. Similarly, on the ToN-IoT dataset, the model
obtains 98.57% accuracy, 0.98 precision, 99.26% recall, and
0.99 F1-score. Such high performance on two IoT-related
datasets can be attributed to the ability of the proposed
framework to jointly model spatial dependencies among
hosts and temporal information of traﬃc ﬂows, enabling
eﬀective detection of attacks.
Furthermore, on the UNSW-NB15 dataset, our method
achieves 99.05% accuracy, 0.95 precision, 96.31% recall,
and 0,97 F1-score. On the NF-UNSW-NB15-v3 dataset, the
method further reaches 99.95% accuracy and 0.99 F1-score,
conﬁrming that explicitly exploiting temporal information
helps capture evolving attack behaviors.
Table 4
Multiclass classiﬁcation statistics and results of speciﬁc classes
in BoT-IoT.
Classes
Statistics
Metrics
Samples
Percentages
Recall
F1-Score
Normal
477
0.00%
80.42%
0.86
DoS
1,620,260
44.16%
99.89%
0.99
DDoS
1,926,624
52.51%
99.98%
0.99
Reconnaissance
91,082
2.48%
99.90%
0.99
Theft
79
0.00%
0.00%
0.00
Weighted Average
-
-
99.93%
0.99
Figure 7: The confusion matrix of BoT-IoT in multiclass
classiﬁcation.
The results on four datasets indicate that integrating
spatial dependencies and temporal information is crucial for
reliable detection across heterogeneous network scenarios.
4.4.2. Multiclass Classiﬁcation
After delving into the performance of our method on
binary classiﬁcations, the performance of multiclass clas-
siﬁcations evaluated on four datasets (e.g.,BoT-IoT, ToN-
IoT, UNSW-NB15 and NF-UNSW-NB15-v3) are also worth
discussing.
Speciﬁcally, on the BoT-IoT dataset, the performance
evaluated on four classes are superior which has a F1-Score
of 0.86, 0.99, 0.99, and 0.99 on Normal, DoS, DDoS, and
Reconnaissance, respectively, and has a weighted average
recall of 99.93%. The perfect performance on DoS and
DDoS indicates that the model successfully captures burst
temporal patterns, which are key features of ﬂooding attacks.
The only underperformance was in an attack Theft due to its
few samples in the dataset, only accounting for almost 0.00%
in all samples. The statistics and detailed results of speciﬁc
classes in BoT-IoT are illustrated in Table 4 and Fig.7.
J. Dai et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 11 of 16

Table 5
Multiclass classiﬁcation statistics and results of speciﬁc classes
in ToN-IoT.
Classes
Statistics
Metrics
Samples
Percentages
Recall
F1-Score
Normal
78,906
3.72%
62.82%
0.73
DoS
338,037
15.95%
96.81%
0.78
DDoS
616,683
29.10%
92.30%
0.95
Backdoor
50,873
2.40%
0.00%
0.00
Injection
45,150
2.13%
28.86%
0.44
Password
135,766
6.17%
82.68%
0.74
Ransomware
80,022
3.64%
63.33%
0.67
Scanning
714,561
32.51%
85.62%
0.89
Xss
210,566
9.58%
87.63%
0.83
Mitm
1,156
0.05%
0.01%
0.02
Weighted Average
-
-
84.52%
0.83
Figure 8: The confusion matrix of ToN-IoT in multiclass
classiﬁcation.
On the ToN-IoT dataset, the result of our method is
comparativelygeneral due to the its complex and unweighted
classes, especially for DoS, DDoS, Scanning and Mitm
attacks. Still, the performance evaluated in most classes are
terriﬁc, which has a F1-Score of 0.95, 0.89 and 0.83 in
DDoS, Scanning and Xss, and a weighted average recall of
84.52%, which demonstrate the eﬀectiveness in identifying
diverse attacks in the complex network scenarios. From the
confusion matrix 8, these attacks typically involve host com-
munications and temporal behavior, which can be eﬀectively
captured through the proposed contrastive learning method.
The statistics and detailed results of speciﬁc classes in ToN-
IoT are illustrated in Table 5 and Fig.8.
For UNSW-NB15 and its netﬂow version 3 NF-UNSW-
NB15-v3 datasets with the same and unweighted classes,
there is a high percentage of benign ﬂows, accounting
for 87.35% and 94.60%, highly susceptible to inaccuarate
results. The performance of our model on UNSW-NB15
Table 6
Multiclass classiﬁcation statistics and results of speciﬁc classes
in UNSW-NB15.
Classes
Statistics
Metrics
Samples
Percentages
Samples
Percentages
Normal
2,218,764
87.35%
100%
1.00
Analysis
2,677
0.10%
0.00%
0.00
Backdoor
2,329
0.09%
0.00%
0.00
DoS
16,353
0.64%
0.45%
0.00
Exploits
44,525
1.75%
90.89%
0.69
Fuzzers
24,246
0.95%
76.20%
0.76
Generic
215,481
8.48%
97.42%
0.98
Reconnaissance
13,987
0.55%
66.99%
0.68
Shellcode
1,511
0.05%
0.00%
0.00
Worms
174
0.00%
0.00%
0.00
Weighted Average
-
-
98.31%
0.98
Table 7
Multiclass classiﬁcation statistics and results of speciﬁc classes
in NF-UNSW-NB15-v3.
Classes
Statistics
Metrics
Samples
Percentages
Recall
F1-Score
Benign
2,237,731
94.60%
99.99%
0.99
Analysis
1,226
0.05%
0.00%
0.00
Backdoor
4,659
0.19%
0.00%
0.00
DoS
5,980
0.25%
0.56%
0.01
Exploits
42,748
1.80%
65.92%
0.65
Fuzzers
33,816
1.42%
82.62%
0.62
Generic
19,651
0.83%
67.09%
0.72
Reconnaissance
17,074
0.72%
39.57%
0.47
Shellcode
2,381
0.10%
0.00%
0.00
Worms
158
0.00%
0.00%
0.00
Weighted Average
-
-
97.81%
0.97
and NF-UNSW-NB15-v3 have a weighted average recall
of 98.31% and 97.81%, and F1-Score of 0.98 and 0.97,
respectively The performance indicates that the model eﬀec-
tively leverages temporal evolution to diﬀerentiate benign
ﬂuctuations from malicious behaviors, while exploiting
spatial dependencies to discriminate among diverse attack
types. The statistics and detailed results of speciﬁc classes
in UNSW-NB15 and NF-UNSW-NB15-v3 are illustrated in
Table 6 and 7, respectively.
4.4.3. Compared with Existing Graph-based Methods
In order to intuitively understand the eﬀectiveness of
our model, we present a more comprehensive compari-
son with the existing graph-based methods, which includes
supervised and self-supervised GNN-based models. This
approach enables us to evaluate the performance of the
proposed method utilizing self-supervised learning and spa-
tial dependencies and temporal information. The strengths
and improvement can be highlighted through comparing
our model with existing state-of-the-art graph-based mod-
els, providing more eﬃcient solutions to network intrusion
detection. Descriptions of the existing graph-based methods
are as follows.
E-GraphSAGE [9]: As the ﬁrst application of GNN in
NIDS, E-GraphSAGE is widely used for network intrusion
detection task while obtaining the superior performance. It
innovatively transforms network traﬃc data into a graph
structure and utilizes the GNN model GraphSAGE and edge
features in the network to learn a complex relationship
J. Dai et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 12 of 16

Table 8
Comparison in binary classiﬁcation results.
Models
Datasets
Metrics
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1-Score
E-GraphSAGE [9]
BoT-IoT
99.99%
1.00
99.99%
1.00
NEGAT+NEGSC [15]
99.99%
0.99
99.99%
0.99
TCG-IDS [19]
99.45%
1.00
99.45%
0.99
Ours
99.99%
0.99
99.99%
0.99
E-GraphSAGE
ToN-IoT
97.87%
1.00
97.87%
1.00
NEGAT+NEGSC
96.76%
0.96
99.81%
0.98
TCG-IDS
97.54%
0.95
97.54%
0.95
Ours
98.57%
0.98
99.26%
0.99
E-GraphSAGE
UNSW-NB15
98.76%
0.91
99.99%
0.95
NEGAT+NEGSC
96.97%
0.91
84.17%
0.87
TCG-IDS
97.83%
0.90
97.83%
0.95
Ours
99.05%
0.95
96.31%
0.97
E-GraphSAGE
NF-UNSW-NB15-v3
99.98%
0.99
99.98%
0.99
NEGAT+NEGSC
98.61%
0.98
75.74%
0.85
TCG-IDS
98.87%
0.98
98.87%
0.96
Ours
99.95%
0.99
99.54%
0.99
between diﬀerent hosts, which lay a solid foundation for the
application of GNN in network intrusion detection.
NEGAT+NEGSC [15]: NEGAT+NEGSC is the ﬁrst
method that applied self-supervised learning and GNN in
NIDS on both binary and multiclass classiﬁcations, getting
the great results while reducing the reliance of labeled
data. It improves the graph attention mechanism using edge
features, named NEGAT, and proposes a self-supervised
learning method based on graph contrastive learning, which
considers the relationship between local and global topol-
ogy of network, evaluating the potential of self-supervised
learning in network intrusion detection.
TCG-IDS [19]: To further explore the advantages of the
raw time in datasets, we compare it with TCG-IDS which
utilized self-supervised learning and the generated time to
implement the experiments. TCG-IDS proposes three con-
trastive learning strategies (e.g., temporal, asymmetric and
masking) to capture the temporal dependencies, consider the
diﬀerent interactions within network data, and improve the
ability to learn the representation, respectively, achieving
superior performance in two diﬀerent netﬂow datasets with-
out timestamps (e.g., NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2 and NF-
UNSW-NB15-v2).
The results of our method on binary classiﬁcation in-
dicates the outstanding performance on BoT-IoT, ToN-
IoT, UNSW-NB15 and NF-UNSW-NB15-v3 datasets. On
BoT-IoT, the proposed method has a accuracy of 99.99%,
precision of 0.99, recall of 99.99% and F1-Score of 0.99,
which achieves the superior performance of E-GraphSAGE
and NEGAT+NEGSC and is slightly higher than TCG-
IDS. On ToN-IoT, our method achieved a accuracy of
98.57%, precision of 0.98, recall of 99.26% and F1-Score of
0.99, outperforming E-GraphSAGE in accuracy and recall,
and NEGAT+NEGSC and TCG-IDS in most metrics. The
results of our method on UNSW-NB15 are accuracy of
99.05%, precision of 0.95, recall of 96.31% and F1-Score
of 0.97, which are higher than two self-supervised learning
methods and on a pair with the supervised E-GraphSAGE.
Moreover, our method has a competitive performance in the
netﬂow dataset NF-UNSW-NB15-v3, achieving a accuracy
of 99.95%, precision of 0.99, recall of 99.54% and F1-Score
of 0.99, which outperforms NEGAT+NEGSC and TCG-
IDS in all metrics, and is slightly lower than E-GraphSAGE.
The detailed results are illustrated as Table. 8
The comparisons with self-supervised GNN-based meth-
ods of binary classiﬁcations on four datasets can demonstrate
that the spatial information and temporal dependencies in
original data with timestamps play a paramount role in
identify whether a network ﬂow is benign. Meanwhile,
our method achieves or even outperforms the performance
supervised GNN-based model E-GraphSAGE and outper-
forms two self-supervised models NEGSC+NEGAT and
TCG-IDS on most datasets, which can indicate the model
using real timestamps can has a competitive performance
without the labeled data.
On multiclass classiﬁcation, our method achieved the
superior performance, as shown in Table. 9. Results on
BoT-IoT achieve a recall of 99.93% and F1-Score of 0.99,
which outperform the performance of the NEGAT+NEGSC
and TCG-IDS, 68.66% and 94.63% in Recall and 0.68 and
0.97 in F1-Score, respectively, and is slightly lower than E-
GraphSAGE, demonstrating the advantage and inﬂuence of
spatial information and temporal dependencies in identify-
ing the speciﬁc attack types with the self-supervised learn-
ing. Results on ToN-IoT achieve a recall of 84.52% and F1-
Score of 0.83in Recall, which outperforms NEGAT+NEGSC,
TCG-IDS and E-GraphSAGE in both metrics. The reason
why the performance is in the range of over 80% in ToN-
IoT dataset we conclude is that it contains diverse attack
types and there is an extreme imbalance among diﬀerent
types. Results on UNSW-NB15 have a recall of 98.31%,
and F1-Score of 0.98, respectively, which have a superior
performance over other three methods. Results on NF-
UNSW-NB15-v3 achieve a recall of 97.81%, and F1-Score
of 0.97, respectively, which outperform the performance
of both self-supervised GNN-based methods in Recall and
F1-Score, and are very close to the supervised method E-
GraphSAGE.
The results compared with self-supervised GNN-based
methods of multiclass classiﬁcations on four datasets can
showthat our proposed method can have a great performance
under an environment of diverse attacks. The results of
comparing with NEGAT+NEGSC which is a static self-
supervised method can indicate the advantage of spatial
dependencies and temporal information in the dynamically
evolving network. Also, the real timestamp of network can
play an essential role in detecting normal and diﬀerent mali-
cious ﬂows through comparing with TCG-IDS. Meanwhile,
our method has a comparable performance with the super-
vised method E-GraphSAGE in total, which demonstrates
the eﬀectiveness of self-supervised learning for identifying
attacks and reducing the reliance of labeled data.
4.5. Ablation Study
To concretize the strenghth of three modules of our
method, ablation experiments are implemented on two datasets
(e.g., ToN-IoT and NF-UNSW-NB15-v3) through removing
each module. The modules contains temporal contrastive
J. Dai et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 13 of 16

Table 9
Comparison in multiclass classiﬁcation results.
Models
Datasets
Metrics
Recall
F1-Score
E-GraphSAGE [9]
BoT-IoT
99.99%
1.00
NEGAT+NEGSC [15]
68.66%
0.68
TCG-IDS [19]
94.63%
0.97
Ours
99.93%
0.99
E-GraphSAGE
ToN-IoT
82.78%
0.82
NEGAT+NEGSC
69.53%
0.62
TCG-IDS
79.53%
0.79
Ours
84.52%
0.83
E-GraphSAGE
UNSW-NB15
95.86%
0.96
NEGAT+NEGSC
96.04%
0.95
TCG-IDS [19]
95.76%
0.89
Ours
98.31%
0.98
E-GraphSAGE
NF-UNSW-NB15-v3
97.36%
0.97
NEGAT+NEGSC
95.82%
0.94
TCG-IDS
95.77%
0.95
Ours
97.81%
0.97
Table 10
Ablation results in binary classiﬁcation of ToN-IoT.
Method
Dataset
Metrics
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1-Score
w/o Temporal
ToN-IoT
97.07%
0.97
98.50%
0.99
w/o Spatial
97.53%
0.97
98.73%
0.99
w/o Feature
97.67%
0.97
98.80%
0.99
Proposed
98.66%
0.98
99.31%
0.99
learning, spatial contrastive learning, and feature contrastive
learning.
The binary results on ToN-IoT and NF-UNSW-NB15
are illustrated in Table 10 and Table 11, respectively. After
removing temporal contrastive module, we can clearly see
that there is a great drop for all metrics, which has an
accuracy, precision, recall and F1-score of 97.07%, 0.97,
98.50% and 0.99, respectively. The method of removed
spatial contrastive module shows the performance increases
slightly than temporal, with accuracy, precision, recall and
F1-score of 97.53%, 0.97, 98.73% and 0.99, respectively.
The method of dropped feature contrastive module has an
accuracy, precision, recall and F1-score of 97.67%, 0.97,
98.80% and 0.99, respectively. The method with three mod-
ules shows a superior performance, with an accuracy, preci-
sion, recall and F1-score of 98.66%, 0.98, 99.31% and 0.99,
which outperforms other three methods.
It has a similar tendency in binary experiments of NF-
UNSW-NB15-v3. There is a great drop for all metrics after
removing temporal contrastive module, which has an accu-
racy, precision, recall and F1-score of 98.61%, 0.99, 85.36%
and 0.74, respectively. The experiment of removed spatial
contrastive module shows the performance has a slight in-
crease than temporal, with accuracy, precision, recall and
F1-score of 99.10%, 0.99, 90.97% and 0.83, respectively.
After dropping feature contrastive module, the method has
an accuracy, precision, recall and F1-score of 99.17%, 0.99,
91.80% and 0.85, respectively. The full method shows a
superior performance, with an accuracy, precision, recall
and F1-score of 99.95%, 0.99, 99.54% and 0.99, which
outperforms other methods with removed module.
Table 11
Ablation results in binary classiﬁcation of NF-UNSW-NB15-v3.
Method
Dataset
Metrics
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1-Score
w/o Temporal
NF-UNSW-NB15-v3
98.61%
0.99
85.36%
0.74
w/o Spatial
99.10%
0.99
90.97%
0.83
w/o Feature
99.17%
0.99
91.80%
0.85
Proposed
99.95%
0.99
99.54%
0.99
Table 12
Ablation results in multiclass classiﬁcation of ToN-IoT.
Methods
Dataset
Metrics
Recall
F1-Score
w/o Temporal
ToN-IoT
82.01%
0.80
w/o Spatial
82.81%
0.81
w/o Feature
82.97%
0.81
Proposed
84.52%
0.83
Table 13
Ablation results in multiclass classiﬁcation of NF-UNSW-
NB15-v3.
Methods
Dataset
Metrics
Recall
F1-Score
w/o Temporal
NF-UNSW-NB15-v3
96.29%
0.95
w/o Spatial
96.74%
0.96
w/o Feature
97.31%
0.96
Propoesd
97.81%
0.97
The ablation results of the ToN-IoT dataset on multi-
classiﬁcation tasks are presented in Table 12. When the
temporal module is removed, the model achieves a Recall
of 82.01% and an F1-Score of 0.80. In contrast, removing
the spatial module increases Recall to 82.81% and F1-Score
to 0.81, slightly outperforming the w/o Temporal results
on both metrics. Without the feature module, the model
achieved a Recall of 82.97% and an F1-Score of 0.81. Its
Recall metric was slightly higher than the previous two
pruning settings, while its F1-Score remained consistent
with w/o Spatial. For the Proposed method incorporating all
modules, the model achieved Recall and F1-Score of 84.52%
and 0.83, respectively.
Table 13 reports the ablation results on the NF-UNSW-
NB15-v3 dataset under the multiclass classiﬁcation setting.
When the temporal module is removed, the model achieves
a Recall of 96.29% and an F1-Score of 0.95. Removing the
spatial module results in a higher Recall of 96.74% and an
F1-Score of 0.96, exceeding the performance of the w/o
Temporal conﬁguration on both metrics. In the absence of
the feature module, the Recall further increases to 97.31%,
while the F1-Score remains at 0.96, which is comparable
to the w/o Spatial setting. With all modules included, the
Proposed method attains the highest Recall (97.81%) and F1-
Score (0.97) among all conﬁgurations. Across both binary
and multiclass classiﬁcation tasks on the ToN-IoT and NF-
UNSW-NB15-v3 datasets, consistent trends can be observed
from the ablation results. Removing the temporal contrastive
module leads to the most pronounced performance degrada-
tion in terms of Recall and F1-Score, indicating its dominant
J. Dai et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 14 of 16

Table 14
Testing Time on Four Datasets.
Models
Datasets
Testing Time (s)
NEGAT+NEGSC [15]
BoT-IoT
0.060
TCG-IDS [19]
0.054
Ours
0.032
NEGAT+NEGSC
ToN-IoT
0.115
TCG-IDS
0.063
Ours
0.032
NEGAT+NEGSC
UNSW-NB15
0.550
TCG-IDS
0.376
Ours
0.077
NEGAT+NEGSC
NF-UNSW-NB15-v3
0.045
TCG-IDS
0.047
Ours
0.043
contribution among the three components. The exclusion of
the spatial module also results in noticeable performance
drops, although its impact is generally less severe than
that of the temporal module. By comparison, removing the
feature module causes relatively smaller performance degra-
dation, suggesting a complementary role in representation
enhancement. The results show that the temporal contrast
module plays an importance role in improving the model’s
performance. Meanwhile, the best performance is consis-
tently achieved when all three modules are jointly employed,
highlighting the necessity of their collaborative integration.
4.6. Speed Testing Experiments
To verify the detection speed of using the simple and
eﬀective bidirectional LSTM plus E-GraphSAGE as the
spatio-temporal encoder, we conducted testson four datasets.
From the table 14, the proposed model demonstrates robust
stability in both testing eﬃciency across four diﬀerent
datasets. On the BoT-IoT and ToN-IoT datasets, the model
achieves a consistent testing time of 0.032 seconds, indi-
cating sustained high inference eﬃciency even under large-
scale IoT traﬃc scenarios. On the UNSW-NB15 dataset, the
testing time slightly increased to 0.077 s, primarily due to
the dataset’s feature dimensionality and complex traﬃc pat-
terns. On the NF-UNSW-NB15-v3 dataset, the testing time
decreased back to 0.043 s, further demonstrating the model’s
strong adaptability across varying data distributions.79
The model delivers fast testing speeds while maintaining
robust detection performance. These results are consistent
with our theoretical analysis of time complexity, futher
validating its feasibility and practical value for real-time
intrusion detection in IoT environments.
5. Conclusion
This paper proposes a self-supervised GNN-based frame-
work for network intrusion detection systems. To the best of
our knowledge, it is the ﬁrst to take advantage of real times-
tamps to eﬀectively identify the types of network ﬂows in
a self-supervised manner. By integrating timestamp-aware
spatio-temporal graph contrastive learning with an eﬃcient
E-GraphSAGE and LSTM based encoder, the proposed
method captures temporal dependencies and spatial relations
in network traﬃc without introducing computationally ex-
pensive attention mechanisms. Moreover, theoretical time
complexity analysis shows that explicitly modeling temporal
dependencies, rather than relying on attention mechanisms,
leads to a lower computational cost.
Extensive experiments on four datasets with dataset-
provided timestamps, BoT-IoT, ToN-IoT, UNSW-NB15 and
NF-UNSW-NB15-v3, demonstrate the high computational
eﬃciency and good generalization of the proposed method.
In particular, attacks with temporally repetitive and struc-
turally consistent interaction patterns (e.g., DoS and DDoS)
are classiﬁed with notably higher accuracy, further high-
lighting the eﬀectiveness of leveraging real timestamps by
the proposed timestamp-aware spatio-temporal contrastive
learning framework. In addition, the experimental results
and ablation studies consistently conﬁrm the importance of
dataset-provided timestamps for intrusion detection.
In the future, we will further reﬁne our modeling of
time-dependent behaviors through more ﬁne-grained tem-
poral analysis, to achieve improved robustness of intrusion
detection systems in dynamic real-world scenarios.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing
ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have
appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.
References
[1] N. Chaabouni, M. Mosbah, A. Zemmari, C. Sauvignac, P. Faruki, Net-
work intrusion detection for iot security based on learning techniques,
IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials 21(3) (2019) 2671–2701.
[2] J. Fu, L. Wang, J. Ke, K. Yang, R. Yu, Tsids: Spatialtemporal fusion
gating multilayer perceptron for network intrusion detection, Expert
Systems with Applications 263 (2025) 125687.
[3] Z. Chen, H. Zou, T. Hu, X. Yuan, X. Fang, Y. Pan, J. Li, Hc-nids:
Historical contextual information based network intrusion detection
system in internet of things, Computers & Security 152 (2025)
104367.
[4] M. Zhong, M. Lin, C. Zhang, Z. Xu, A survey on graph neural
networks for intrusion detection systems: Methods, trends and chal-
lenges, Computers & Security 141 (2024) 103821.
[5] A. Thakkar, R. Lohiya, A review on machine learning and deep
learning perspectives of ids for iot: Recent updates, security issues,
and challenges., Archives of computational methods in engineering
28 (4) (2021).
[6] A. L. Buczak, E. Guven, A survey of data mining and machine
learning methods for cyber security intrusion detection, IEEE Com-
munications surveys & tutorials 18 (2) (2015) 1153–1176.
[7] N. Shone, T. N. Ngoc, V. D. Phai, Q. Shi, A deep learning approach to
network intrusion detection, IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics
in Computational Intelligence 2 (1) (2018) 41–50.
[8] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lio, Y. Ben-
gio, Graph attention networks, arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10903
(2017).
[9] W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, M. Sarhan, M. Gallagher, M. Portmann, E-
graphsage: A graph neural network based intrusion detection system
for iot, arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.16329 (2021).
[10] G. Duan, H. Lv, H. Wang, G. Feng, Application of a dynamic line
graph neural network for intrusion detection with semisupervised
J. Dai et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 15 of 16

learning, IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security
18 (2022) 699–714.
[11] Y. Liu, M. Jin, S. Pan, C. Zhou, Y. Zheng, F. Xia, P. S. Yu, Graph
self-supervised learning: A survey, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge
and Data Engineering 35 (6) (2022) 5879–5900.
[12] W. Ju, Y. Wang, Y. Qin, Z. Mao, Z. Xiao, J. Luo, J. Yang, Y. Gu,
D. Wang, Q. Long, et al., Towards graph contrastive learning: A
survey and beyond, arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.11868 (2024).
[13] Q. Liu, H. Zhang, Y. Zhang, L. Fan, X. Jin, Ssa-gat: Graph-based self-
supervised learning for network intrusion detection, in: International
Conference on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks, Springer, 2024, pp. 476–
491.
[14] E. Caville, W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, M. Portmann, Anomal-e: A self-
supervised network intrusion detection system based on graph neural
networks, Knowledge-Based Systems 258 (2022) 110030.
[15] R. Xu, G. Wu, W. Wang, X. Gao, A. He, Z. Zhang, Applying self-
supervised learning to network intrusion detection for network ﬂows
with graph neural network, Computer Networks 248 (2024) 110495.
[16] Z. A. Sahili, M. Awad, Spatio-temporal graph neural networks: A
survey, arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.10569 (2023).
[17] L. Van Langendonck, Ppt-gnn: a practical pre-trained temporal graph
neural network for intrusion detection, Master’s thesis, Universitat
Politècnica de Catalunya (2024).
[18] E. S. Escriche, J. Nyberg, Y. Kim, G. Dán, Channel-centric spatio-
temporal graph networks for network-based intrusion detection, in:
2024 IEEE Conference on Communications and Network Security
(CNS), IEEE, 2024, pp. 1–9.
[19] C. Wu, J. Sun, J. Chen, M. Alazab, Y. Liu, Y. Xiang, 햳햢햦-햨햣햲:
Robust network intrusion detection via temporal contrastive graph
learning, IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security
20 (2025) 1475–1486.
[20] C.-H. Lee, Y.-Y. Su, Y.-C. Lin, S.-J. Lee, Machine learning based net-
work intrusion detection, in: 2017 2nd IEEE International conference
on computational intelligence and applications (ICCIA), IEEE, 2017,
pp. 79–83.
[21] R. Vinayakumar, K. P. Soman, P. Poornachandran, Applying con-
volutional neural network for network intrusion detection, in: 2017
International conference on advances in computing, communications
and informatics (ICACCI), IEEE, 2017, pp. 1222–1228.
[22] H. He, X. Sun, H. He, G. Zhao, L. He, J. Ren, A novel multimodal-
sequential approach based on multi-view features for network intru-
sion detection, IEEE Access 7 (2019) 183207–183221.
[23] X. Liu, F. Zhang, Z. Hou, L. Mian, Z. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Tang, Self-
supervised learning: Generative or contrastive, IEEE Transactions on
Knowledge and Data Engineering 35 (1) (2021) 857–876.
[24] B. Perozzi, R. Al-Rfou, S. Skiena, Deepwalk: Online learning of
social representations, in: Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD
international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining,
2014, pp. 701–710.
[25] A. Grover, J. Leskovec, node2vec: Scalable feature learning for
networks, in: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international
conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, 2016, pp. 855–
864.
[26] T. N. Kipf, M. Welling, Variational graph auto-encoders, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1611.07308 (2016).
[27] P. Veličković, W. Fedus, W. L. Hamilton, P. Liò, Y. Bengio,
R. D. Hjelm, Deep graph infomax, arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.10341
(2018).
[28] Y. You, T. Chen, Y. Sui, T. Chen, Z. Wang, Y. Shen, Graph con-
trastive learning with augmentations, Advances in neural information
processing systems 33 (2020) 5812–5823.
[29] Y. Han, L. Hui, H. Jiang, J. Qian, J. Xie, Generative subgraph con-
trast for self-supervised graph representation learning, in: European
Conference on Computer Vision, Springer, 2022, pp. 91–107.
[30] E. Rossi, B. Chamberlain, F. Frasca, D. Eynard, F. Monti, M. Bron-
stein, Temporal graph networks for deep learning on dynamic graphs,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.10637 (2020).
[31] K.-J. Chen, L. Liu, L. Jiang, J. Chen, Self-supervised dynamic graph
representation learning via temporal subgraph contrast, ACM Trans-
actions on Knowledge Discovery from Data 18 (1) (2023) 1–20.
[32] H. Wang, X. Di, Y. Wang, B. Ren, G. Gao, J. Deng, An intelligent
digital twin method based on spatio-temporal feature fusion for iot
attack behavior identiﬁcation, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications 41 (11) (2023) 3561–3572.
[33] B. Yu, H. Yin, Z. Zhu, Spatio-temporal graph convolutional networks:
A deep learning framework for traﬃc forecasting, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1709.04875 (2017).
[34] G. Duan, H. Lv, H. Wang, G. Feng, X. Li, Practical cyber attack
detection with continuous temporal graph in dynamic network system,
IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security 19 (2024)
4851–4864.
[35] Z. Lu, W. Wang, C. Wang, On the evolution and impact of mobile bot-
nets in wireless networks, IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing
15 (9) (2016) 2304–2316.
[36] N. Samia, S. Saha, A. Haque, Predicting and mitigating cyber threats
through data mining and machine learning, Computer Communica-
tions 228 (2024) 107949.
[37] X. Zang, J. Gong, M. Wang, P. Gao, G. Zhang, Ip traﬃc behavior char-
acterization via semantic mining, Journal of Network and Computer
Applications 213 (2023) 103603.
[38] X. Ma, J. Wu, S. Xue, J. Yang, C. Zhou, Q. Z. Sheng, H. Xiong,
L. Akoglu, A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection with
deep learning, IEEE transactions on knowledge and data engineering
35 (12) (2021) 12012–12038.
[39] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan,
T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, et al., Pytorch: An
imperative style, high-performance deep learning library, Advances
in neural information processing systems 32 (2019).
[40] M. Fey, J. E. Lenssen, Fast graph representation learning with pytorch
geometric, arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.02428 (2019).
[41] N. Koroniotis, N. Moustafa, E. Sitnikova, B. Turnbull, Towards the
development of realistic botnet dataset in the internet of things for
network forensic analytics: Bot-iot dataset, Future Generation Com-
puter Systems 100 (2019) 779–796.
[42] N. Moustafa, TON-IoT Dataset, [Online], available:
https://
cloudstor.aarnet.edu.au/plus/s/ds5zW91vdgjEj9i (2020).
[43] N. Moustafa, J. Slay, Unsw-nb15: a comprehensive data set for net-
work intrusion detection systems (unsw-nb15 network data set), in:
2015 military communications and information systems conference
(MilCIS), IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–6.
[44] M. Luay, S. Layeghy, S. Hosseininoorbin, M. Sarhan, N. Moustafa,
M. Portmann, Temporal analysis of netﬂow datasets for network
intrusion detection systems, arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.04404 (2025).
J. Dai et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 16 of 16
