Graphs are ubiquitous as they naturally capture interactions between entities, such as user interaction in online social media, paper citations in bibliographic networks, and user-product preferences in sales networks. Recently, graph representation learning has gained significant popularity in both academia and industry thanks to its state-of-the-art performance in a variety of downstream machine learning (ML) tasks, such as friend recommendations and anomaly detection. Specifically, node representation learning (embedding) aims to find a dense vector of rich latent features per entity that can be used in ML tasks. However, these dense representations with fixed dimensions come with computational and storage challenges for real-world graphs with many millions or billions of nodes, and the "black-box" nature of the latent features impedes interpretability. On the other hand, graph summarization aims to find a concise and interpretable representation of the original graph that describes its key information, but it is often lossy and trades off space and performance in ML tasks. In this thesis, we bridge the two lines of research, node embedding and graph summarization: we introduce scalable methods for generating summaries of latent or non-latent (original) node features that achieve the state-of-the-art performance on ML tasks while requiring significantly reduced storage and supporting interpretability. Specifically, we introduce a new problem, latent network summarization, which summarizes the graph structural features in static networks as latent node embeddings for storage and query efficiency, and extend this idea to incorporate temporal proximity in temporal summaries of continuous-time dynamic networks. We also perform an extensive systematic study of temporal summaries and show that they capture the graph structure and temporal dependency at least as well as recently-proposed dynamic embedding approaches, while having significantly less complexity (i.e., no transitional or latent variables). Unlike methods that are based on complex models as "black boxes", our temporal summaries are easy-to-understand, which motivates their usage for practitioners in predictive applications. Finally, we summarize the non-latent graph features by modeling feature importance as the high-level knowledge through traditional and deep learning models that can be used for graph analysis and transfer learning. Throughout the thesis, we demonstrate the effectiveness, scalability and space efficiency of our methods on industrial applications such as entity linkage, user stitching, professional role inference, and temporal link prediction, and present insights that can inform further methodological development and applications.