Skip to main content
Search
Submit
Donate
Log in
Computer Science > Machine Learning
[Submitted on 24 Dec 2023]
Graph Coarsening via Convolution Matching for Scalable Graph Neural Network Training
Charles Dickens, Eddie Huang, Aishwarya Reganti, Jiong Zhu, Karthik Subbian, Danai Koutra
Graph summarization as a preprocessing step is an effective and complementary technique for scalable graph neural network (GNN) training. In this work, we propose the Coarsening Via Convolution Matching (CONVMATCH) algorithm and a highly scalable variant, A-CONVMATCH, for creating summarized graphs that preserve the output of graph convolution. We evaluate CONVMATCH on six real-world link prediction and node classification graph datasets, and show it is efficient and preserves prediction performance while significantly reducing the graph size. Notably, CONVMATCH achieves up to 95% of the prediction performance of GNNs on node classification while trained on graphs summarized down to 1% the size of the original graph. Furthermore, on link prediction tasks, CONVMATCH consistently outperforms all baselines, achieving up to a 2x improvement.
Subjects:	Machine Learning (cs.LG)
Cite as:	arXiv:2312.15520 [cs.LG]
 	(or arXiv:2312.15520v1 [cs.LG] for this version)
 	
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2312.15520
Focus to learn more
Submission history
From: Charles Dickens [view email]
[v1] Sun, 24 Dec 2023 16:07:14 UTC (3,159 KB)

Access Paper:
View PDF
HTML (experimental)
TeX Source
view license
Current browse context:
cs.LG
< prev   |   next >

new | recent | 2023-12
Change to browse by:
cs

References & Citations
NASA ADS
Google Scholar
Semantic Scholar
Export BibTeX Citation
Bookmark
 
Bibliographic Tools
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Bibliographic Explorer Toggle
Bibliographic Explorer (What is the Explorer?)
Connected Papers Toggle
Connected Papers (What is Connected Papers?)
Litmaps Toggle
Litmaps (What is Litmaps?)
scite.ai Toggle
scite Smart Citations (What are Smart Citations?)
Code, Data, Media
Demos
Related Papers
About arXivLabs
Which authors of this paper are endorsers? | Disable MathJax (What is MathJax?)
We gratefully acknowledge support from our major funders, member institutions, and all contributors.
About
·
Help
·
Contact
·
Subscribe
·
Copyright
·
Privacy
·
Accessibility
·
Operational Status
(opens in new tab)
Major funding support from